* ...THAT YOU CAN'T SEE. *
IT MAKES US UNIQUELY HUMAN.
I WAS JUST DOING HIS
UNIVERSAL HEARING SCREEN.
BUT WHAT HAPPENS WHEN
A CHILD HAS PROBLEMS?
UH-OH!  GRACE!
* LA, LA, LA, LA *
CAN YOU SAY  HEAVY ?
HEAVY.
TODAY WE'LL HELP
WITH LANGUAGE DELAYS...
WE'RE REALLY PART
OF AN ORGANIZATION
THAT'S MEANT FOR KIDS.
AND NEW FINDINGS ABOUT
HOW KIDS REALLY LEARN.
WE HAVE TO USE
TRICKY METHODS.
HER MIND GETS WAY AHEAD
OF HER CAPACITY TO
PUT SPEECH TOGETHER.
Narrator:
BRAZELTON ON PARENTING.
( theme music playing )
SPEECH AND LANGUAGE--
THEY'RE PART OF OUR
SPECIAL CAPACITIES,
MARKING US AS UNIQUELY HUMAN.
THEIR DEVELOPMENT
HAS ALWAYS BEEN
A COMPELLING TOPIC
FOR PARENT
AND SCIENTIST ALIKE.
BUT TODAY, NEW STRIDES
ARE BEING MADE
IN UNDERSTANDING
LANGUAGE AND SPEECH,
REVEALING EXCITING INSIGHTS
INTO HOW AND HOW EARLY
A CHILD LEARNS
TO COMMUNICATE.
JOIN ME NOW IN A FASCINATING
JOURNEY OF DISCOVERY.
THE PLACE--
CONNECTICUT CHILDREN'S
MEDICAL CENTER.
CHERYL ARCHER IS
THE TEAM LEADER FOR
SPEECH AND LANGUAGE CARE.
THE SPECIAL THING ABOUT THIS
CENTER IS THAT WE'RE REALLY
PART OF AN ORGANIZATION
THAT'S MEANT FOR KIDS.
WE'RE A COMPREHENSIVE
HOSPITAL,
AND WE ARE COMPLETELY
KID-ORIENTED.
I WAS JUST DOING
HIS UNIVERSAL
HEARING SCREEN HERE.
WE TEST EVERY BABY.
Brazelton:
SCIENTISTS HAVE FOUND THAT
EARLY DETECTION IS CRITICAL.
FIRST I HAVE TO STICK THESE
LITTLE EARMUFFS ON HIM.
THIS IS WHAT HELPS READ
THROUGH THE COMPUTER.
Archer:
CHILDREN WHO ARE NOT
SCREENED AT BIRTH
MIGHT NOT HAVE THEIR
HEARING LOSS DETECTED
UNTIL TWO YEARS OF AGE.
HE'LL HEAR SOFT-
AND HIGH-PITCHED NOISES
RIGHT INTO HIS EARS,
AND THEN THOSE SENSORS
ON HIS FACE AND ON HIS NECK
CAN TELL IF HE IS
RESPONDING TO THEM.
Archer:
SO WE WANT TO DETECT
A HEARING LOSS
AS SOON AS POSSIBLE
AND HOPEFULLY PREVENT
ANY DELAYS
IN DEVELOPMENT.
Brazelton:
HEARING AND SPEECH PROBLEMS
ARE OFTEN INTERRELATED.
UH-OH!  GRACE!
* LA, LA, LA, LA *
PEEK-A-BOO!
THAT'S WHY HEARING TESTS
ARE PRIMARY
DIAGNOSTIC TOOLS.
I'M STILL OVER HERE!
GOOD JOB!
EVEN SIMPLE THINGS
LIKE EAR INFECTIONS
CAN CAUSE SPEECH DELAYS.
OH, NO!
PEEK-A-BOO!
Rita Daves:
MANY OF THE CHILDREN THAT HAVE
DIFFICULTIES WITH ORAL MOTOR
HAVE DIFFICULTIES MAKING
A VARIETY OF SOUNDS,
WHICH THEN CAUSE THEM
TO HAVE DIFFICULTY
IMITATING OR MAKING WORDS.
PARENTS DON'T UNDERSTAND.
FOR EXAMPLE, A CHILD
MIGHT SAY  UH,
AND IT MIGHT BE  CUP.
AND MANY TIMES, THE REASON
THEY CAN'T SAY THAT
IS BECAUSE THEIR MOUTH
ISN'T WORKING THE WAY
THEY WANT IT TO WORK.
Brazelton:
OR IT CAN BE SOMETHING
MORE ORGANIC
- TO SPEECH PRODUCTION.
-HELLO!
Daves:
THE EARLIER WE WORK WITH THEM,
THE EASIER IT IS
TO FIX OR
TO HELP THE FAMILIES.
MOMMY COMES
WITH YOU, HUH?
MOMMY COMES WITH YOU
EVERY DAY.
Archer:
PARENTS ARE AFRAID THAT
THEIR CHILDREN WON'T BE ABLE
TO PLAY WITH OTHER KIDS
OR SUCCEED IN SCHOOL,
- DO YOU HEAR IT? GOOD!
- YEAH.
AND THEY WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THEY'RE DOING
EVERYTHING POSSIBLE
FOR THEIR CHILDREN.
Brazelton:
IT'S REALLY CRITICAL
TO DO SO.
HE WON'T EAT IT
UNLESS YOU TELL HIM
WHAT IT IS.
-IT'S A BOAT.
- THE THERAPISTS HERE
USE TECHNIQUES
DESIGNED ESPECIALLY
FOR KIDS.
- SAY,  EAT BOAT.
- EAT BOAT.
AAH!  HE ATE
YOUR HEAD!
AND NOT JUST IN
A HOSPITAL ENVIRONMENT.
Daves:
IN THEIR HOME, YOU CAN SEE
THE THINGS THAT ARE IMPORTANT
IN HIS LIFE OR HER LIFE,
AND YOU CAN WORK THAT WAY,
AND INTO THEIR LIFE.
IT BECOMES MORE
NATURAL FOR THEM,
AND THEY LEARN IT QUICKER.
THE OTHER IMPORTANT FACTOR
IS THAT
YOU CAN TEACH
THE FAMILY MEMBERS
RIGHT ON THE SPOT.
Brazelton:
THE BOLANDS ARE
A PERFECT EXAMPLE.
WE WERE MARRIED
11 YEARS AGO,
AND WE HAD JUSTIN FIVE YEARS
INTO OUR MARRIAGE,
AND CHANDLER CAME ALONG ABOUT
THREE AND A HALF YEARS AFTER.
IT'S HEAVY.
CAN YOU SAY  HEAVY ?
HEAVY!
Brazelton:
JODI AND MICHAEL
NOTICED PROBLEMS EARLY.
- Jodi Boland: HE WOULD
SAY ABOUT FOUR THINGS.
-HIS COMPREHENSION WAS THERE.
HE UNDERSTOOD YOU
WHEN YOU WOULD SAY TO HIM,
CHANDLER, GO OVER HERE
OR  MOVE THIS
OR  DO SOMETHING.
HE WOULD DO IT,
BUT HE COULDN'T
COMMUNICATE BACK.
HE WOULD ALWAYS BE, LIKE,
BLAH, BLAH, BLAH, BLAH, BLAH.
THAT REALLY PUT A LIGHT ON
IN MY HEAD.
MY DOCTOR HAD GIVEN US
AN 800 NUMBER THAT YOU CALL.
SO I CALLED THE 800 NUMBER...
- LOOK WHO'S HERE!
- ...AND RITA CAME ALONG
TO OUR HOUSE.
- CHANDLER WAS
REFERRED AT 22 MONTHS.
-HI, CHANDLER. GOOD WAVING.
- SAY,  HI, RITA.
- HI!
Rita:
AND HE HAD SOME
ORAL MOTOR ISSUES.
I COULD TELL BY LOOKING AT HIM.
AND I EXPLAINED THAT
TO MOM RIGHT AWAY
WHEN WE DETERMINED
THAT HE WOULD BE ELIGIBLE
FOR SERVICES.
- ( babbling )
- WE CAN GO INSIDE. DO YOU
WANT TO PLAY WITH THE TOYS?
- WHO IS THAT?
- ( exclaims )
- THAT'S DIPSY.
-  DIPPY.
VERY NICE,
USING YOUR SOUNDS.
Brazelton:
RITA'S NOT ONLY
A GREAT THERAPIST,
SHE'S A MARVEL
AT MOTIVATION.
RITA COMES TO OUR HOUSE
WITH A WHOLE ARRAY
OF NEW TOYS.
AND THEN HE WANTS TO SIT DOWN
RIGHT AWAY AND,
LET'S SEE WHAT'S
IN YOUR BOX,  AND--
AND FOR HIM IT'S JUST--
I THINK IN HIS MIND--
I COULD BE WRONG,
BUT I THINK FOR HIM,
IT'S JUST AN HOUR OF PLAY.
CHANDLER DOES
A MUCH BETTER JOB
USING HIS LANGUAGE
TO COMMENT ON THE TOYS
RATHER THEN ACTUALLY
USING THE WORDS
TO ASK FOR THINGS.
Rita:
A TWO-YEAR-OLD'S
MOST NATURAL ACTIVITY IS PLAY,
AND IT'S EASIER
FOR A CHILD TO LEARN
AND TO TALK TO THE TOYS
AND TELL THEM WHAT TO DO
THAN IT IS
TO ACTUALLY TELL
THEIR MOTHER OR FATHER
OR THEIR BROTHER OR SISTER.
LOOK AT WHO I FOUND.
WHO'S THAT?
- MEOW.
- MEOW-- THAT'S RIGHT.
WE'LL WORK WITH
ANIMAL SOUNDS AND CARS
AND JUST THE TYPICAL
TWO-YEAR-OLD TYPES OF TOYS
THAT THEY ENJOY.
AND THEN I WORK ON SOME
ORAL-MOTOR COMPONENTS.
AND THIS IS DESIGNED
TO HELP INCREASE
THE TONE IN HIS MOUTH
SO THAT HE CAN MOVE
HIS TONGUE MORE FLUIDLY
WHEN HE MAKES SPEECH SOUNDS.
Brazelton:
THE CHILD-ORIENTED TECHNIQUES
ARE INGENIOUS.
MOST OFTEN,
WE'RE WORKING ON TONGUE
AND WE'RE WORKING ON
LIP MOVEMENT.
AND GENERALLY BY DOING THAT,
WE WORK THROUGH FEEDING
AND BLOWING ACTIVITIES.
WOW! LOOK AT
THAT LITTLE BUBBLE!
POP! POP!
THIS IS CALLED
A FIVE-POINT BITE.
BITE! GOOD BOY.
Brazelton:
EVERY EXERCISE
HAS A PURPOSE.
IF YOU HAVE HIM
BITE SOMETHING--
LIKE THIS--
BITE--
HIS TONGUE WILL FOLLOW
YOU AUTOMATICALLY.
IT'S REFLEXIVE.
- THAT GETS THAT TONGUE MOVING
AGAIN FROM SIDE TO SIDE.
- OKAY.
ONCE HE CAN DO THAT
MORE EFFICIENTLY
IS WHEN WE ARE GONNA GET
BETTER TONGUE ELEVATION,
AND THAT'S WHEN
WE GET THOSE SOUNDS--
THOSE  T's
AND THOSE "D's"
AND THOSE "N's.
Brazelto
ONCE AGAIN,
EARLY INTERVENTION
IS THE KEY.
WITHOUT THE THERAPY,
CHANDLER WOULD PROBABLY
HAVE BECOME VERY FRUSTRATED.
- HEY, CHANDLER.
- YEAH?
- DID RITA COME TODAY?
- YEP.
Rita:
BECAUSE HE WOULDN'T BE
UNDERSTOOD BY HIS FAMILY,
AND THEN THERE WOULD'VE BEEN
A SITUATION THAT COULD HAVE
DEVELOPED BEHAVIORALLY.
AND I WOULD DEFINITELY SAY
IF YOU EVEN HAVE A QUESTION
IF YOU THINK YOUR CHILD HAS
A COMMUNICATION PROBLEM
IS TO DEFINITELY CALL
AND GET HELP.
CAN I SEE?
- OH, VERY NICE. EXCELLENT.
- VERY GOOD!
Jodi:
IT'S ALMOST LIKE
A BLOSSOM HAS OPENED
FROM WHEN
HE WAS A SMALL, LITTLE BUD.
- NOT REALLY SURE IF HE
WAS DEVELOPING PROPERLY,
- HERE YOU GO.
BUT NOW HE'S JUST BLOSSOMED
INTO THIS BEAUTIFUL FLOWER.
FAST BREAK.
YAY!
WITH US TODAY
IS CRYSTAL HOLMES,
OUR INTERNET EXPERT
FROM I.B.M.
CRYSTAL, ARE THERE
THINGS ON THE INTERNET
THAT WOULD HELP PARENTS
WHO ARE WORRIED
ABOUT THEIR CHILD'S
SPEECH DEVELOPMENT?
THERE ARE A LOT OF REALLY GOOD
SITES, BERRY, THAT PROVIDE
INFORMATION FOR PARENTS.
WHY DON'T WE GO
TO ONE OF THE SITES
AND SEE WHAT WE CAN FIND.
HERE WE'RE AT THE PAMPERS
PARENTING INSTITUTE,
AND IF WE DO A SEARCH
ON DEVELOPMENT,
LET'S SEE IF
WE CAN FIND ANYTHING
SPECIFIC TO LANGUAGE.
THERE'S AN ARTICLE
ON YOUR BABY'S
SIGHT AND HEARING.
IF WE CLICK ON THAT ARTICLE,
WE CAN SEE THAT IT SHOWS US
THAT A BABY'S SPEECH
AND THEIR HEARING
ARE LINKED.
NOW, WE MAY HAVE
VERY SPECIFIC QUESTIONS
ABOUT LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT.
MAYBE WE NEED A HEALTH-CARE
PROFESSIONAL, AND WE DON'T
KNOW WHERE TO FIND ONE.
WE CAN DO A SEARCH
ON LANGUAGE.
LET'S SEE WHAT
WE COME UP WITH.
THE FIRST HIT IS
THE AMERICAN SPEECH LANGUAGE
HEARING ASSOCIATION.
WE CAN GO TO THIS SITE
AND SEE WHAT RESOURCES
THEY HAVE AVAILABLE.
YOU CAN SEE THAT THEY TALK
ABOUT THE ASSOCIATION,
BUT THEY ALSO PROVIDE
INFORMATION REGARDING
HEALTH-CARE PROFESSIONALS.
THIS SITE IS GREAT
IF YOU NEED TO FIND
A SPEECH-LANGUAGE
PATHOLOGIST OR AUDIOLOGIST.
THE INTERNET IS
A WONDERFUL RESOURCE
FOR PARENTS
TO DO SELF-EDUCATION
OR TO ACTUALLY FIND
RESOURCES TO HELP THEM,
REGARDLESS OF WHAT
THE NEED MAY BE.
I'M SO GLAD THERE'S THIS KIND
OF HELP FOR PARENTS,
'CAUSE THEY WORRY A LOT
ABOUT IT, AND THEY SHOULD.
A CHILD WHO CAN'T
COMMUNICATE
IS ALREADY
A HANDICAPPED CHILD.
OUR INTERNET QUESTION TODAY
COMES FROM ALEX
IN BEAUMONT, TEXAS.
HIS QUESTION IS:
WELL, IT'S EARLY
TO WORRY ABOUT THAT,
BUT I THINK IT'S A GOOD IDEA
TO BE SURE THAT HER HEARING
IS OKAY AND SO FORTH
WHEN YOU GO TO YOUR PHYSICIAN
OR YOUR NURSE PRACTITIONER.
BUT YOU KNOW, THERE ARE WAYS
TO TELL FOR YOU AS A PARENT,
AND THAT IS, DOES SHE HAVE
RECEPTIVE SPEECH?
DOES SHE UNDERSTAND WHAT
YOU'RE ASKING WHEN YOU
ASK HER TO DO SOMETHING?
CAN SHE COMMUNICATE
BEHAVIORALLY?
DOES SHE LET YOU KNOW
BEHAVIORALLY THAT
SHE UNDERSTANDS YOU
AND THAT YOU CAN
UNDERSTAND HER GESTURES?
THOSE ARE WAYS
TO MARK SPEECH.
BY TWO, I WOULD BE WORRIED
IF HER SPEECH HASN'T DEVELOPED,
AND THAT'S THE TIME TO LOOK
FOR A SPEECH PATHOLOGIST
WHO UNDERSTANDS
SMALL CHILDREN.
SO I THINK YOU ARE RIGHT
TO THINK ABOUT IT.
FOR MORE RESOURCES,
VISIT US ON-LINE AT:
ENTING,
PRESENTED BY
THE PARENTING INSTITUTE
AT pampers.com.
LANGUAGE AND SPEECH
DEVELOP IN STAGES
OVER THE FIRST FEW YEARS.
I'M JOINED TODAY BY
DR. ROBERTA GOLINKOFF,
THE DIRECTOR
OF THE LANGUAGE LAB
AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF DELAWARE.
ROBERTA, ONE OF
THE MOST AMAZING THINGS
YOU'VE FOUND OUT
IS HOW EARLY SPEECH BEGINS
AND HOW CRITICAL IT IS
FOR A CHILD TO BE ABLE
TO COMMUNICATE
HIS WISHES, HIS DREAMS,
HIS THOUGHTS.
IT IS AMAZING HOW EARLY
THE PROCESS BEGINS.
IT BEGINS IN THE WOMB,
ONCE THE BABY CAN HEAR.
BABIES COME OUT
BEING ABLE TO RECOGNIZE
THEIR MOTHER'S VOICE
OVER A STRANGER'S VOICE
AND BEING ABLE TO RECOGNIZE
THEIR OWN LANGUAGE
OVER A FOREIGN LANGUAGE.
- ISN'T THAT WONDERFUL?
- IT'S AMAZING!
- HOW EARLY?
- FOUR DAYS OF AGE.
WE HAVE TO USE
TRICKY METHODS
TO GET BABIES TO SHOW US
WHAT THEY KNOW,
AND ONE OF THE METHODS
THAT WE USE IS SUCKING.
SO WE GIVE BABIES
A NIPPLE,
AND WE ALLOW THEM
TO SUCK ON IT WHILE WE PLAY
EITHER THEIR MOTHER'S VOICE
OR A STRANGER'S VOICE
READING A STORY,
AND THEN WE SWITCH VOICES,
BUT WE DON'T TELL THE BABY.
AND IF THE BABY STARTS
SUCKING FAST AGAIN,
WE KNOW THAT
THE BABY HAS RECOGNIZED
THE DIFFERENCES IN THE VOICES.
AND BABIES APPEAR
TO PREFER TO LISTEN TO
THEIR OWN MOM'S VOICE
OVER A STRANGE WOMAN'S VOICE.
AND THE ONLY REASON THAT
WE KNOW THESE THINGS IS BECAUSE
WE HAVE COME UP WITH
THESE TRICKY METHODS
IN THE LAST 15 YEARS.
BEFORE THAT,
WE REALLY DIDN'T KNOW
HOW MUCH BABIES WERE
WORKING ON LANGUAGE
AND HOW EARLY.
ROBERTA, WHEN
SHOULD PARENTS WORRY?
YOU TELL ME THAT
THEY SHOULD BE SAYING
- A WORD OR TWO AT TWO,
- OH, YES.
AND THAT THEY SHOULD
BE UNDERSTANDING
- RECEPTIVE SPEECH BY TWO.
- LOTS OF WORDS BY TWO.
- WHEN SHOULD THEY DO SOMETHING?
- THE VERY FIRST THING
ONE CHECKS OUT IS HEARING.
- HEARING?
- THE VERY FIRST THING.
CHILDREN ARE MORE LIKELY
TO GET EAR INFECTIONS
WHEN THEY'RE MIXING
WITH OTHER CHILDREN.
AND EAR INFECTIONS
ARE THE FIRST
LINE OF DEFENSE
AGAINST SPEECH DELAYS.
AND MANY PARENTS
WILL TAKE THEIR CHILDREN
TO THE PEDIATRICIAN
IF THE CHILD HAS A FEVER
AND CLEARLY HAS
AN EAR INFECTION,
BUT THEY WON'T
OFTEN FOLLOW UP TWO
OR THREE WEEKS LATER
TO MAKE SURE THAT
THE FLUID IN THE MIDDLE EAR
HAS DRIED UP.
THE RESEARCH IS CLEAR--
THAT HAVING REPEATED
EAR INFECTIONS
MAKES IT HARDER
TO LEARN LANGUAGE.
IT'S ALMOST LIKE
BEING IN THE BATHTUB.
YOU'RE UNDERWATER
WHEN SOMEBODY'S TRYING
TO TALK TO YOU,
YOU AND YOU'RE HEARING IT
THROUGH THIS MASS OF FLUID.
SO IT'S HARD TO MAKE OUT
THE INDIVIDUAL SOUNDS
AND THE SEQUENCES OF SOUNDS--
- SO THEY CAN IMITATE IT
AND BEGIN TO PICK UP ON IT.
- YES. YES.
AND I'VE HEARD
TAPES OF CHILDREN
WHO HAVE A LOSS
OF THE MIDDLE RANGE,
AND IT'S GARBLED,
YOU CAN'T UNDERSTAND ANYTHING
THAT'S COMING THROUGH IT.
- YEAH.
- THIS MUST BE A PROBLEM, TOO,
WITH MIDDLE EAR, ISN'T IT?
YES, AND I THINK
THE THING THAT PARENTS
HAVE TO KEEP IN MIND
IS BEING VIGILANT
AND MAKING SURE
THAT THE CHILD DOES NOT
HAVE FLUID IN THERE.
I WOULD THINK IF--
BETWEEN 24 AND 28 MONTHS,
IF PARENTS HAVE
A SENSE THAT
CHILDREN AREN'T MAKING EYE
CONTACT, THAT THEY DON'T
WANT TO SIT AND HEAR A STORY,
THAT THEY CAN'T FOLLOW
SIMPLE COMMANDS,
IT'S TIME TO DO SOMETHING--
IN ADDITION TO THE FACT
THAT THEY'RE NOT
USING WORDS.
BUT I WOULD ALSO LIKE
TO EMPHASIZE AGAIN
THAT THERE'S SUCH WIDE
VARIABILITY OF THE BEGINNING
OF LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT
THAT I WANT PARENTS TO HAVE
A GOOD TIME WITH THEIR KIDS
AND INTERACT CONVERSATIONALLY
WITH THEIR CHILDREN
AND RECOGNIZE THAT
A 24-MONTH-OLD
CAN BE PUTTING TWO WORDS
TOGETHER OR SAYING
ONLY ONE WORD AT A TIME,
AND MOST OF THE TIME
THOSE CHILDREN ARE
BOTH GONNA BE FINE,
INCLUDING THE 24-MONTH-OLD
THAT'S SPEAKING
IN PARAGRAPHS.
THERE'S SUCH VARIABILITY
AT THE BEGINNING,
SO I DON'T WANT PARENTS
TO WORRY THAT MUCH.
Brazelton:
NEXT, WE TALK TO PARENTS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
Woman:
WE'VE SOLD OUT.
WE HAVE OVER 900 PEOPLE--
Brazelton:
EACH YEAR WE TRAVEL
ALL OVER AMERICA...
Man:
OUR COMMUNITY IS
SO EXCITED ABOUT THIS.
...TO ANSWER QUESTIONS
FROM THOUSANDS OF PARENTS.
Emcee:
I'D LIKE TO WELCOME
DR. T. BERRY BRAZELTON.
Brazelton:
HERE ARE SOME OF THEM.
HI, DOCTOR.
I HAVE A DAUGHTER
THAT'S TWO AND A HALF,
AND I'VE NOTICED
OVER THE LAST MONTH
THAT SHE STARTED TO STUTTER.
AND IT'S VERY NOTICEABLE,
AND I'M NOT QUITE SURE
WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT,
AND I WAS WONDERING
WHAT YOUR THOUGHTS ARE.
I'VE HEARD FROM
SOME PEOPLE THAT IT COULD BE
A DEVELOPMENTAL BEHAVIOR.
WELL, I CAN TELL YOU
THAT IT IS NORMAL
AND IT COMES JUST AT A TIME--
I CAN EVEN--
THINK I CAN TELL YOU
THE MECHANISM.
AS THEY LEARN SPEECH--
AND THIS IS WHAT'S INTERESTING--
SHE'S JUST PROBABLY BEGUN
TO SPEAK WELL, HASN'T SHE?
- YES.
- AND PUT WORDS TOGETHER.
HER MIND GETS WAY AHEAD
OF HER CAPACITY TO
PUT SPEECH TOGETHER,
SO SHE BEGINS TO EITHER
STAMMER OR STUTTER,
AND IT'S A VERY NORMAL
DEVELOPMENTAL PROCESS.
AND AS THEY GET
BETTER AND BETTER AT IT,
IT DROPS OUT
UNLESS SOMEBODY PAYS
TOO MUCH ATTENTION TO IT.
AND YOU MAY HAVE TO ASK
OTHER PEOPLE NOT TO, TOO,
BECAUSE EVERYBODY WANTS
TO HELP HER.
THEY WANT TO GIVE HER THE WORD.
WELL, THAT ISN'T GONNA HELP HER.
IT JUST EMPHASIZES
WHAT SHE MAY ALREADY BE
A LITTLE BIT
UPTIGHT ABOUT--
THAT I CAN'T QUITE
GET IT OUT YET.
AND IT WILL COME.
IS THERE A POINT, THOUGH,
THAT YOU SAY,
THIS ISN'T CHANGING ?
- IS THERE AN AGE WHERE THAT--
- MAYBE FOUR OR FIVE.
- FOUR OR FIVE?
-MM-HMM, I WOULD THINK
IT'D BE A LOT LATER.
BUT IT DOESN'T, TO ME,
RING A BELL OF HAVING
ANYTHING WRONG UP HERE.
I WOULD LET IT GO RIGHT NOW
AND WATCH THE COURSE OF IT.
YOU'VE PROBABLY SEEN STUTTERERS
WHO GET SO UPTIGHT
THAT THEY JUST STUTTER MORE
'CAUSE THEY CAN'T GET IT OUT.
THEN UNLESS THAT BEGAN
TO HAPPEN, I WOULDN'T BE
VERY WORRIED ABOUT IT.
- OKAY, THANK YOU.
- GOOD FOR YOU.
MY NAME IS MELISSA,
AND MY QUESTION TO YOU IS,
WHAT ARE THE BEST WAYS
TO ENCOURAGE LANGUAGE
DEVELOPMENT IN A TODDLER?
- IN A TODDLER?  UH-HUH.
-IN A TODDLER.
- TELL ME ABOUT YOUR TODDLER.
-HE'S 26 MONTHS OLD,
AND HE SAYS
MAMA  AND  DADA,
BUT THAT'S IT.
- I CAN'T GET HIM TO SAY
ANYTHING ELSE.
- REALLY?
- YEAH.
-DO YOU THINK HE HEARS?
WE'VE HAD HIS HEARING TESTED,
AND HE CAN HEAR.
- ARE YOU SURE THAT
HE DOES UNDERSTAND YOU?
- I DON'T KNOW.
UH-HUH.
BECAUSE RECEPTIVE SPEECH--
WELL, I THINK YOU'RE IN
THE MIDDLE OF A BIG
DIAGNOSTIC DECISION
AND WHETHER TO GO
GET HIM TESTED OR NOT.
IF HE REALLY HAD
RECEPTIVE SPEECH,
WHICH MEANS HE DID
UNDERSTAND YOU,
AND IF YOU PUT
A SECOND THING--
GO GET SO-AND-SO,
DO SOMETHING TO IT
AND BRING IT TO MOMMY,
HE COULD DO
ALL THAT WITHOUT--
AND, YOU KNOW,
NEGATIVISM IS NORMAL
AT THAT AGE--
BUT IF HE COULD DO
ALL THAT, YOU'D KNOW
HE HAD RECEPTIVE SPEECH.
THE NEXT THING I'D LOOK FOR
IS BEHAVIORAL SPEECH.
DOES HE HAVE BEHAVIOR
HE COMMUNICATES WITH YOU?
IF HE DOES,
THAT'S TELLING YOU
SOMETHING TOO.
AND THE THIRD THING IS
WHY HIS SPEECH
IS SO SPARSE AT TWO,
BECAUSE THAT'S PRETTY SPARSE.
IT'S VERY SCARY,
'CAUSE HE GOES TO DAYCARE,
- AND ALL HIS OTHER FRIENDS
TALK AND--
- YEAH.
YOU ASKED ME HOW
YOU HELP HIM TALK.
YOU LOOK IN THEIR FACES,
YOU SAY THINGS TO 'EM,
YOU PICK UP ON WHAT THEY SAY
AND ENLARGE ON IT
JUST A LITTLE BIT--
NOT TOO MUCH--
BECAUSE THEN YOU'VE
OVERWHELMED THEM--
AND THEN THEY IMITATE YOU,
WHY, THAT'S TELLING YOU
SOMETHING-- THAT THEY'RE TRYING.
YEAH, IT SEEMS LIKE HE TRIES
TO, LIKE, SAY SOMETHING,
BUT IT JUST--
HE JUST CAN'T DO IT.
WELL, THERE ARE
TWO-YEAR-OLD EVALUATIONS NOW
THAT ARE SO SIMPLE
AND TELL YOU SO MUCH
THAT I WOULDN'T HESITATE
TO HAVE ONE.
- THANK YOU.
- GREAT.
( people applauding )
I HAVE A QUESTION
ABOUT LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT.
MY HUSBAND'S FIRST LANGUAGE
IS ITALIAN,
AND WHEN MY DAUGHTER WAS BORN
HE SPOKE STRICTLY ITALIAN
- FOR THE FIRST
COUPLE OF YEARS.
- GREAT.
BUT WE FOUND THAT SHE REALLY
RESENTED IT, AND IT--
- SHE RESENTED IT?
- YEAH, IT CREATED A BARRIER
IN THEIR RELATIONSHIP.
SHE DIDN'T WANT
TO TALK TO HIM.
SHE UNDERSTOOD WHAT HE WAS
SAYING, BUT SHE DIDN'T LIKE IT.
AND SHE STARTED TO SPEAK LESS
AND LESS IN ENGLISH TO HIM.
SO AT TWO YEARS OLD,
HE STOPPED.
- HE MUST FEEL SO SHUT OUT.
- WHICH IS WHY HE GAVE IT UP.
AND I FEEL, AS AN ADULT
WHO TRIED TO LEARN
A FOREIGN LANGUAGE
THAT I REALLY WANTED THAT GIFT
GIVEN TO MY CHILDREN.
- I DO KNOW THAT
IT'S CONFUSING TO 'EM.
- MM-HMM.
- DO YOU SPEAK
ITALIAN WITH HIM?
- NO.
I TRY, BUT IT'S NOT
AS NATURAL, SO--
WELL, I WOULD THINK
IF YOU DID,
IT WOULD MAKE IT
EASIER FOR HER TO,
- SO YOU MIGHT TRY
EVEN HARDER.
- MM-HMM.
I ALWAYS DO RECOMMEND JUST
EXACTLY WHAT YOU SAID--
THAT TWO LANGUAGES IN INFANCY
AND EARLY CHILDHOOD
IS SUCH AN ASSET LATER ON.
NOW, THEY DON'T
SPEAK EARLY.
SHE'S THREE NOW.
IS IT TO LATE TO
TRY TO REINTRODUCE IT?
I'D HATE TO GIVE UP
ON THE CHANCE FOR HER TO LEARN,
AND SO SURE,
I'D INTRODUCE IT
AT SENSITIVE TIMES.
AND I WOULD WATCH SOMETHING
THAT MAY BE HAPPENING
THAT YOU'RE NOT EVEN AWARE OF,
AND YOU MAY WITHOUT KNOWING IT,
WHEN HE TALKS TALKING ITALIAN,
FROWN OR GIVE HER A SIGNAL
THAT THIS ISN'T
WHAT WE'RE UP TO,
AND I'D WATCH THAT.
- OKAY.
- CROSS THAT LINE YOURSELF
AND LAUGH ABOUT HOW HARD IT IS
FOR YOU TO LEARN IT
AND SORT OF
LEAD HER INTO IT.
AND IF SHE HAD
PERMISSION FROM YOU
TO SOP UP THE LANGUAGE
AS WELL AS EVERYTHING ELSE,
WHY, IT WOULD
CERTAINLY MAKE SENSE.
- OKAY, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
- GREAT.  OKAY.
FOR TAPES
AND TRANSCRIPTS, CALL:
OR LOG ON AT:
ARENTING,
PRESENTED BY
THE PARENTING INSTITUTE
AT pampers.com.
I HOPE YOU'VE GOTTEN
SOME INSIGHTS
INTO THE FASCINATING WORLD
OF LANGUAGE LEARNING,
AND I ALSO HOPE YOU'VE
COME TO AN APPRECIATION
OF HOW CRITICAL IT IS
TO GET YOUR KIDS HELP
IF THEY NEED IT.
OH, ONE MORE THING--
KIDS LOVE TO COMMUNICATE.
IT'S WHAT WE'RE ALL
BORN TO DO.
SO TALK TO THEM,
READ TO THEM,
AND MORE IMPORTANT,
LISTEN TO THEM.
I PROMISE YOU'LL BE
GLAD YOU DID.
( theme music playing )